Math/math.md, before:

# Math notes

> Using KaTeX for some math notations and examples

-   [Math notes](#Math-notes)
    -   [General](#General)
    -   [Units of mass volume and length](#Units-of-mass-volume-and-length)

---

TODO: Move this to appropriate files

## General

-   The **absolute value** is just the number's distance from the zero.
    $$
    |5| = 5\enspace abs\enspace of\enspace 5\enspace is\enspace 5.
    $$
    $$
    |-10| = 10\enspace abs\enspace of\enspace -10\enspace is\enspace 10.
    $$
-   **Addition** of the odd and even number will always result in the odd number.
-   **Addition** of odd and odd number will always return even number (except for zero)
-   **Zero** is even number.
-   Simple **subtraction**:

    ```none
        340,567
        -86,415
        --------
        254,152
    ```

-   **Subtracting** negative numbers: $8 - (-7) = 15$ Negative and negative always result in positive value: $-2 - (-3) = 1$

---

## Units of mass volume and length

In the metric system of measurement, the most common units of mass are the gram and kilogram.

1 kilogram=1000 grams

> To convert kilograms to grams we multiply the number of kilograms by 1000. To convert grams to kilograms we divide the number of grams by 1000.

In the metric system of measurement, the most common units of volume are milliliters and liters.

In the metric system of measurement, the most common units of distance are millimeters, centimeters, meters, and kilometers.

---

In the customary (US/imperial) system of measurement, the most common units of weight are the ounce (oz) and pound (lb). 1 pound = 16 ounces 1 ounce = $\frac{1}{16}$ pound.

> To convert ounces to pounds we divide the number of ounces by 16.

In the US customary system of measurement, the most common units of volume are cups, pints, quarts and gallons.

A juice box contains about 111 cup of liquid. A pint is equal to 222 cups. A water bottle contains about 111 pint of liquid. A quart is equal to 222 pints. A large shampoo bottle contains about 111 quart of liquid. A gallon is equal to 444 quarts. A milk jug contains about 111 gallon of liquid.

1 pint = 2 cups 1 quart = 4 cups 1 quart = 2 pints 1 gallon = 4 quarts

In the US customary system of measurement, the most common units of distance are inches, feet, yards, and miles.

1 foot = 12 inches 1 yard = 3 feet 1 yard = 36 inches 1 mile = 1760 yards

---

Commit message:

math: notes and exercises on 1.3 of The Art of Problem Solving

Math/math.md, after:

# Math notes

> Scraps from other notes, should probably delete this one

> Using KaTeX for some math notations and examples

-   [Math notes](#Math-notes)
    -   [General](#General)
    -   [Units of mass volume and length](#Units-of-mass-volume-and-length)

---

TODO: Move this to appropriate files

## General

-   The **absolute value** is just the number's distance from the zero.
    $$
    |5| = 5\enspace abs\enspace of\enspace 5\enspace is\enspace 5.
    $$
    $$
    |-10| = 10\enspace abs\enspace of\enspace -10\enspace is\enspace 10.
    $$
-   **Addition** of the odd and even number will always result in the odd number.
-   **Addition** of odd and odd number will always return even number (except for zero)
-   **Zero** is even number.
-   Simple **subtraction**:

    ```none
        340,567
        -86,415
        --------
        254,152
    ```

-   **Subtracting** negative numbers: $8 - (-7) = 15$ Negative and negative always result in positive value: $-2 - (-3) = 1$

---

## Units of mass volume and length

In the metric system of measurement, the most common units of mass are the gram and kilogram.

1 kilogram=1000 grams

> To convert kilograms to grams we multiply the number of kilograms by 1000. To convert grams to kilograms we divide the number of grams by 1000.

In the metric system of measurement, the most common units of volume are milliliters and liters.

In the metric system of measurement, the most common units of distance are millimeters, centimeters, meters, and kilometers.

---

In the customary (US/imperial) system of measurement, the most common units of weight are the ounce (oz) and pound (lb). 1 pound = 16 ounces 1 ounce = $\frac{1}{16}$ pound.

> To convert ounces to pounds we divide the number of ounces by 16.

In the US customary system of measurement, the most common units of volume are cups, pints, quarts and gallons.

A juice box contains about 111 cup of liquid. A pint is equal to 222 cups. A water bottle contains about 111 pint of liquid. A quart is equal to 222 pints. A large shampoo bottle contains about 111 quart of liquid. A gallon is equal to 444 quarts. A milk jug contains about 111 gallon of liquid.

1 pint = 2 cups 1 quart = 4 cups 1 quart = 2 pints 1 gallon = 4 quarts

In the US customary system of measurement, the most common units of distance are inches, feet, yards, and miles.

1 foot = 12 inches 1 yard = 3 feet 1 yard = 36 inches 1 mile = 1760 yards

---
