Math/square_roots.md, before:

# Square roots

-   [Square roots](#square-roots)
    -   [Perfect Squares](#perfect-squares)
    -   [Calculating Square Roots](#calculating-square-roots)
    -   [Principal square root](#principal-square-root)
    -   [Simplifying square roots](#simplifying-square-roots)

---

A square root of a number is a value that can be multiplied by itself to give the original number. A square root of 9 is 3 because when 3 is multiplied by itself we get 9.

It is like asking: **What can we multiply by itself to get this?**

`√` - This is the special symbol that means "square root", it is sort of like a tick, and actually started hundreds of years ago as a dot with a flick upwards. It is called the **radical**.

## Perfect Squares

The Perfect Squares (also called "Square Numbers") are the squares of the integers:

| int | perfect square |
| --- | -------------- |
| 0   | 0              |
| 1   | 1              |
| 2   | 4              |
| 3   | 9              |
| 4   | 16             |
| 5   | 25             |
| 6   | 36             |
| 7   | 49             |
| 8   | 64             |
| 9   | 81             |
| 10  | 100            |
| 11  | 121            |
| 12  | 144            |
| 13  | 169            |
| 14  | 196            |
| 15  | 225            |

## Calculating Square Roots

It's kinda easy to work out the square root of a perfect square, but it is really hard to work out other square roots.

Example: what is √10?

Well, 3 × 3 = 9 and 4 × 4 = 16, so we can guess the answer is between 3 and 4. At this point, I get out my calculator and it says: `3.1622776601683793319988935444327`

But the digits just go on and on, without any pattern. So even the calculator's answer **is only an approximation** ! Numbers like this are called Irrational Numbers

## Principal square root

For example, √9 = 3 but (-3)^2 = 9 too!

Because of this, we can differentiate between the positive and negative sqare root values. When someone asks to find a Principal (positive) square root (√3) that means that he/she wants a positive number. If someone wants a negative square root that would be written as this: (-√3).

`- √9 = - 3`

---

$$
5 \sqrt{117} = 5 \times \sqrt{(3 \times 3 \times 13)} = 5\sqrt{3 \times 3} \sqrt{13} = 5\sqrt{9} \sqrt{13} = 15\sqrt{13}
$$

because 13 x 9 = 117, we then simplify 9 to 3 x 3 = 9, and sqrt(9) = 3; 5 x 3 = 15 x sqrt(13). We cannot factor it out as it's prime number.

---

26 don't have any perfect squares in it too, so we can leave it like this:

$$
3 \sqrt{26} = 3 \sqrt{26}
$$

## Simplifying square roots

Roots are nice, but we prefer dealing with regular numbers as much as possible. So, for example, instead of √4 we prefer dealing with 2. What about roots that aren't equal to an integer, like √20? Still, we can write 20 as 4⋅5 and then use known properties to write √(4⋅5) as √4⋅√5, which is 2√5. We _simplified_ √20.

Example, simplify $\sqrt{72}$:

Firstly, let's factor 72:

```none
       72
      /  \
     2   36
        / \
       2   18
          /  \
         2    9
      /  \
                    3  3
```

Which gives us: $$72 = 2 \times 2 \times 3 \times 3 \times 2 = 2^2 \times 3^2 \times 2$$ So:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sqrt{72} &= \sqrt{2^2 \times 3^2 \times 2} \\ &= \sqrt{2^2} \times \sqrt{3^2} \times \sqrt{2} \\ &= 2 \times 3 \times \sqrt{2} \\ &= 6\sqrt{2}
\end{aligned}
$$

Commit message:

math: square roots and exponents

Math/square_roots.md, after:

# Square roots

-   [Square roots](#square-roots)
    -   [Perfect Squares](#perfect-squares)
    -   [Calculating Square Roots](#calculating-square-roots)
    -   [Principal square root](#principal-square-root)
    -   [Simplifying square roots](#simplifying-square-roots)

---

A square root of a number is a value that can be multiplied by itself to give the original number. A square root of 9 is 3 because when 3 is multiplied by itself we get 9.

It is like asking: **What can we multiply by itself to get this?**

`√` - This is the special symbol that means "square root", it is sort of like a tick, and actually started hundreds of years ago as a dot with a flick upwards. It is called the **radical**.

## Perfect Squares

The Perfect Squares (also called "Square Numbers") are the squares of the integers:

| int | perfect square |
| --- | -------------- |
| 0   | 0              |
| 1   | 1              |
| 2   | 4              |
| 3   | 9              |
| 4   | 16             |
| 5   | 25             |
| 6   | 36             |
| 7   | 49             |
| 8   | 64             |
| 9   | 81             |
| 10  | 100            |
| 11  | 121            |
| 12  | 144            |
| 13  | 169            |
| 14  | 196            |
| 15  | 225            |

## Calculating Square Roots

It's kinda easy to work out the square root of a perfect square, but it is really hard to work out other square roots.

Example: what is √10?

Well, 3 × 3 = 9 and 4 × 4 = 16, so we can guess the answer is between 3 and 4. At this point, I get out my calculator and it says: `3.1622776601683793319988935444327`

But the digits just go on and on, without any pattern. So even the calculator's answer **is only an approximation** ! Numbers like this are called Irrational Numbers

## Principal square root

For example, √9 = 3 but (-3)^2 = 9 too!

Because of this, we can differentiate between the positive and negative sqare root values. When someone asks to find a Principal (positive) square root (√3) that means that he/she wants a positive number. If someone wants a negative square root that would be written as this: (-√3).

`- √9 = - 3`

---

$$
5 \sqrt{117} = 5 \times \sqrt{(3 \times 3 \times 13)} = 5\sqrt{3 \times 3} \sqrt{13} = 5\sqrt{9} \sqrt{13} = 15\sqrt{13}
$$

because 13 x 9 = 117, we then simplify 9 to 3 x 3 = 9, and sqrt(9) = 3; 5 x 3 = 15 x sqrt(13). We cannot factor it out as it's prime number.

---

26 don't have any perfect squares in it too, so we can leave it like this:

$$
3 \sqrt{26} = 3 \sqrt{26}
$$

## Simplifying square roots

Roots are nice, but we prefer dealing with regular numbers as much as possible. So, for example, instead of √4 we prefer dealing with 2. What about roots that aren't equal to an integer, like √20? Still, we can write 20 as 4⋅5 and then use known properties to write √(4⋅5) as √4⋅√5, which is 2√5. We _simplified_ √20.

Example, simplify $\sqrt{72}$:

Firstly, let's factor 72:

```none
       72
      /  \
     2   36
        / \
       2   18
          /  \
         2    9
      /  \
     3    3
```

Which gives us: $72 = 2 \times 2 \times 3 \times 3 \times 2 = 2^2 \times 3^2 \times 2$ So:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sqrt{72} &= \sqrt{2^2 \times 3^2 \times 2} \\ &= \sqrt{2^2} \times \sqrt{3^2} \times \sqrt{2} \\ &= 2 \times 3 \times \sqrt{2} \\ &= 6\sqrt{2}
\end{aligned}
$$

---

What's the difference between $x^2 = 9$ and $\sqrt{9}$?

In the first we're asked what numbers squared are 9, so x can be 3 or -3. We can write this as $x=\pm 3$. In the second x=3, because _x_ is the square root of 9, which implies the positive value.

> Rule of a thumb is that if the radical sign or frictional power is already there, only give the positive solution, if not, give all solutions.

We can run into difficulty of multiple roots for even powers. For odd powers there is no confusion because negative numbers raised to an odd number are negative and positive numbers raised to an odd number are positive. For example, the only real number which cubed equals 8 is 2, because -2 cubed is -8.

What is the difference between $(-1)^{\frac{1}{2}}$ and $-1^{\frac{1}{2}}$?

**The first denotes the square root of -1, while the second asks for the negative of the square root of 1.** This is very clear if we write the two in radical notation: the first is $\sqrt{-1}$ while the second is $-\sqrt{1}$. There is a big difference between the two. There is no real number which equals the first while the second is equal to -1.

---

_Some examples:_

1. $x=(-2)^5=-32$
    - Because $2^5$ is 32
2. $x=\sqrt[3]{-\frac{1}{8}}=-\frac{1}{8}^{\frac{1}{3}}=-\frac{1^{\frac{1}{3}}}{8^{\frac{1}{3}}}=-\frac{1}{\sqrt[3]{8}}=-\frac{1}{2}$
3. $x^6=64=\pm2$
    - even power, so we have to take into account both positive and negative roots
4. $x^3=64=4$
    - odd power, so we're not concerned about multiple roots
5. $x=(-27)^{-\frac{2}{3}}=(-27^{\frac{1}{3}})^{-2}=(\sqrt[3]{-27})^{-2}=(-3)^{-2}=\frac{1}{(-3)^2}= \frac{1}{9}$
6. $x^{\frac{5}{3}}=243 =(x^{\frac{5}{3}})^{\frac{3}{5}}=x^1=243^{\frac{3}{5}}=(243^{\frac{1}{5}})^3=3^3=27$
